---
title: "What is the Goal of Generative Models?"
mathjax: true
layout: post
categories:
  - github
  - website
---

## Introduction
A large majority of the generative models today rely on diffusion or flow matching methods. At a very high level, diffusion and flow matching learn to map some easy to sample distribution (e.g. a Gaussian) to some distribution of interest. In the case of text-to-image models, the terminal distribution is often a conditional distribution based on the text provided to the model. Of course there are nuances between these approaches, but fundamentally they are trained in a fashion that maximizes the likelihood of the data. This doesn't seem like an issue in setting like image or video generation where the large corpus of data used to train the model captures a lot of what humans think of as a visually appealing image or coherent video. However, what happens when someone wants to use these models for scientific domains where the end goal is discovery? Surely, the molecular or protein sequence data that we have at our disposal does not exhaustively cover the entire space of possible / viable molecules or proteins.

Currently, researchers attempt to mitigate this issue by finetuning a trained model on some alternative objective function using reinforcement learning, a reward function from energy based models, among many others. This seems like a potentially round about way for scientific discovery. It is of course no easy task, but I'd guess better results could be obtained by training models to meet some objective function first. I understand that much of the outputs could be complete nonsense, but I don't think we want to constrain our model to try to accurately model the known distribution when trying to make scientific breakthroughs.
